docs/src/read_data.md, before:

# Read Snapshot Data


```@meta
CurrentModule = GadgetIO
DocTestSetup = quote
    using GadgetIO
end
```

## Reading the header


Reading the header block of the simulation can be done by using:

```julia
 h = read_header(filename::String)
```

Where `h` is the returned [`Header`](@ref) object:

```julia
mutable struct Header
    npart::Vector{Int32}                # an array of particle numbers per type in this snapshot
    massarr::Vector{Float64}            # an array of particle masses per type in this snapshot - if zero: MASS block present
    time::Float64                       # time / scale factor of the simulation
    z::Float64                          # redshift of the simulation
    flag_sfr::Int32                     # 1 if simulation was run with star formation, else 0
    flag_feedback::Int32                # 1 if simulation was run with stellar feedback, else 0
    nall::Vector{UInt32}                # total number of particles in the simulation
    flag_cooling::Int32                 # 1 if simulation was run with cooling, else 0
    num_files::Int32                    # number of snapshots over which the simulation is distributed
    boxsize::Float64                    # total size of the simulation box
    omega_0::Float64                    # Omega matter
    omega_l::Float64                    # Omega dark enery
    h0::Float64                         # little h
    flag_stellarage::Int32              # 1 if simulation was run with stellar age, else 0
    flag_metals::Int32                  # 1 if simulation was run with metals, else 0
    npartTotalHighWord::Vector{UInt32}  # weird
    flag_entropy_instead_u::Int32       # 1 if snapshot U field contains entropy instead of internal energy, else 0
    flag_doubleprecision::Int32         # 1 if snapshot is in double precision, else 0
    flag_ic_info::Int32                 # 1 if the IC file contains an INFO block   
    lpt_scalingfactor::Float32          # (almost) never used
    fill::Vector{Int32}                 # the HEAD block needs to be filled with zeros to have a size of 256 bytes
end
```

This is equivalent to:

```julia
 h = head_to_obj(filename::String)
```

If you want to read the header information into a dictionary you can use:

```julia
 h = head_to_dict(filename::String)
```

## Reading a snapshot


### Full snapshot
If you want to read a simulation snapshot into memory with GadgetIO.jl, it's as easy as this:

```julia
    data = read_snap(filename)
```

This will return a dictionary with the header information in `data["Header"]` and the blocks sorted by particle type.

As an example, this is how you would access the positions of the gas particles:

```julia
    data["Parttype0"]["POS"]
```


### Specific blocks

Reading specific blocks only works with Format 2 at the moment.

If you only want to read a specific block for a single particle type, e.g. positions of gas particles, you can use the function with a specified blockname and particle type like so:

```julia
    pos = read_snap(filename, "POS", 0)
```

This will return an array of the datatype of your simulation, usually `Float32`.

If the snapshot has no info block this will fail unfortunately.

You can still read the specific block by supplying a hand-constructed [`Info_Line`](@ref) object:

```julia
mutable struct Info_Line
    block_name::String              # name of the data block, e.g. "POS"
    data_type::DataType             # datatype of the block, e.g. Float32 for single precision, Float64 for double
    n_dim::Int32                    # number of dimensions of the block, usually 1 or 3
    is_present::Vector{Int32}       # array of flags for which particle type this block is present,
                                    # e.g. gas only:  [ 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0 ]
                                    # e.g. gas + BHs: [ 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1 ]
end
```

and passing that to the function [`read_block_by_name`](@ref):

```julia
    pos = read_block_by_name(filename, "POS", info=pos_info, parttype=0)
```

where `pos_info` is an [`Info_Line`](@ref) object.

[`read_snap`](@ref) is used mainly as a wrapper function to call [`read_block_by_name`](@ref), in case you were wondering about the function name change.

I will collect some example `Info_Line` objects in a later release to be able to read some common blocks even without an info block.

### Getting snapshot infos

If you have a Format 2 snapshot and just want to know what blocks the snapshot contains you can use the function

```julia
    print_blocks(filename)
```

to get an output of all block names.

If your simulation contains an INFO block you can read the info lines into [`Info_Line`](@ref) object like so:

```julia
    info = read_info(filename, verbose=true)
```

This will return an Array of [`Info_Line`](@ref) objects. The optional keyword `verbose` additionally gives the same functionality as [`print_blocks`](@ref) and prints the names to the console.


### Reading particles by referenced ID

If you want to select specific particles to read from an array if `IDs` you can do this with [`read_particles_by_id`](@ref):

```julia
read_particles_by_id(snap_base::String, selected_ids::Array{<:Integer}, 
                     blocks::Array{String}; 
                     parttype::Integer=0, verbose::Bool=true,
                     pos0::Array{<:Real}=[-1.234, -1.234, -1.234],
                     r0::Real=0.0)
```

`snap_base` defines the target snapshot, or the snapshot directory, `selected_ids` contains the list of IDs of the particles you want to read and `blocks` containes the blocksnames of the blocks you want to read.
If the simulation is too large to read the whole snapshot into memory you can give values for `pos0` and `r0` to read only a specific region with [`read_particles_in_volume`](@ref). See [Large Simulations](@ref) for details on this.

This will return a dictionary with all requested blocks.

## Read subvolumes


For large simulations Gadget distributes snapshots over multiple files. These files contain particles associated with specific Peano-Hilbert keys.

To get all particles within a subvolume of the simulation you can use the functions [`read_particles_in_box`](@ref) or [`read_particles_in_volume`](@ref).

[`read_particles_in_box`](@ref) takes a box defined by a lower-left corner and an upper-right corner, constructs the peano hilbert keys, selects the relevant files and reads the particles from these files into a dictionary.

```julia
function read_particles_in_box(filename::String, blocks::Vector{String},
                               corner_lowerleft,
                               corner_upperright;
                               parttype::Int=0,
                               verbose::Bool=true)

            (...)

end
```

You can define an array of blocks you want to read, these will be read in parallel with simple multi-threading.

[`read_particles_in_volume`](@ref) is a simple wrapper around [`read_particles_in_box`](@ref), where you can define a central position and a radius around it and it will construct the box containing that sphere for you and read all particles in it.

```julia
function read_particles_in_volume(filename::String, blocks::Vector{String},
                                  center_pos::Vector{AbstractFloat},
                                  radius::AbstractFloat;
                                  parttype::Int=0,
                                  verbose::Bool=true)

            (...)
end
```

In both functions `parttype` defines the particle type to be read, as in the previous read functions and `verbose` gives console output.

### Filename

With the snapshots being distributed over multiple filenames you need to be careful with that keyword. In this case filename refers to the base-name. Assuming you want to read snapshot 140, which is in the snapshot directory 140 the filename is

```julia
filename = "path/to/your/snapshot/directories/snapdir_140/snap_140"
```

GadgetIO will then automatically loop through the sub-snapshots which end in ".0", ".1", ... , ".N".

### Example

If you want to, e.g. read positions, velocities, masses, density and hsml for all gas particles within the virial radius of the most massive halo of a simulation you can do this as follows.

Assuming `pos_halo` is the position of the center of mass of the halo and `r_vir` is its virial radius you read the data with

```julia
blocks = ["POS", "VEL", "MASS", "RHO", "HSML"]

data   = read_particles_in_volume(filename, blocks, pos_halo, r_vir,
                                  parttype=0,
                                  verbose=true)
```

This will return a dictionary with the blocks as keys and containing the arrays for the particles.

```julia
data["POS"]  # array of positions
data["RHO"]  # array of densities
(...)
```

## Read distributed snapshotfiles

If you want to read in a simulation whose snapshots have been distributed over a number of sub-snapshots you can use [`read_blocks_over_all_files`](@ref).

```julia
read_blocks_over_all_files(snap_base::String, blocks::Array{String}, filter_function::Function; 
                                    N_to_read::Integer=-1, parttype::Integer=0)
```
This will read the specified `blocks` for all particles that pass the `filter_function`. This can be useful if you don't know where the region you are interested in is located and don't have enough memory to read in all particles.

### Filter functions

The `filter_function` can be any function that takes a `String` input and returns an `Array` of `Integer`s, or `CartesianCoordinates`.
For example, if you want to filter all particles with a Mach number larger than 1:

```julia
function mach_gt_1(snap_file)
    mach = read_snap(snap_file, "MACH", 0)
    sel  = findall( mach .> 1.0 )
    return sel
end
```

Or if you want to trick the function into reading all particles after all:

```julia
function pass_all(snap_file)
    h = read_header(snap_file)
    return collect(1:h.npart[1])
end
```

# Read Subfind Data


## Reading the header


Similarly to the normal snapshot you can read the header of the subfind output into a [`SubfindHeader`](@ref) object

```julia
struct SubfindHeader
    nhalos::Int32                       # number of halos in the output file
    nsubhalos::Int32                    # number of subhalos in the output file
    nfof::Int32                         # number of particles in the FoF
    ngroups::Int32                      # number of large groups in the output file
    time::Float64                       # time / scale factor of the simulation
    z::Float64                          # redshift of the simulation
    tothalos::UInt32                    # total number of halos over all output files
    totsubhalos::UInt32                 # total number of subhalos over all output files
    totfof::UInt32                      # total number of particles in the FoF
    totgroups::UInt32                   # total number of large groups over all output files
    num_colors::Int32                   # number of colors
    boxsize::Float64                    # total size of the simulation box
    omega_0::Float64                    # Omega matter
    omega_l::Float64                    # Omega dark enery
    h0::Float64                         # little h
    flag_doubleprecision::Int32         # 1 if snapshot is in double precision, else 0
    flag_ic_info::Int32
end
```

using

```julia
h = read_subfind_header(filename::String)
```

## Reading the subfind files


If you compiled Gadget with `WRITE_SUB_IN_SNAP_FORMAT` you can read the subfind output like you would a normal snapshot, with any of the above methods. For convenience you can also use a helper function provided by GadgetIO. Since each of the blocks is only relevant for either halos, subhalos, Fof or large groups you don't need to define a particly type, aka halo type in this case.

So in order to read the virial radius of the halos in a file you can simply use

```julia
R_vir = read_subfind(filename, "RVIR")
```

## Filtered read-in

If you want to read specific halos from the subfind output you can use the function

```julia
filter_subfind(filebase::String, blockname::String, filter_function::Function, nfiles::Integer=1)
```

This will return an array of [HaloID](@ref)s 

```julia
struct HaloID
    file::Int64
    id::Int64
end
```

You can use this to read specific files with [`read_subfind`](@ref) and select the array entry via the `id` field.

The `filter_function` argument takes any function that takes one input argument and returns `true` if the requirement is fulfilled, or `false` if not.

So to find e.g. all halos with a virial mass largert than ``10^{15} M_\odot`` you can use

```julia
find_mass_gt_1e15(M) = ( (M > 1.e15) ? true : false )

filtered_subfind = filter_subfind(filebase, "MVIR", find_mass_gt_1e15)
```

This will search all subfind files in the directory and check if they fulfill the filter. Since halos in subfind files are sorted by mass you can also supply a number of files to search with the argument `nfiles`. That way, if you are looking for a very massive halo you can constrian the reading and filtering to only the first `N` files to save time.


## Reading particles in a halo


If you want to read all particles associated with a FoF halo you can do this with the function [`read_particles_in_halo`](@ref)

```julia
read_particles_in_halo( snap_base::String, blocks::Array{String},
                        sub_base::String, halo::HaloID; 
                        rad_scale::Real=1.0, halo_type::Integer=1,
                        parttype::Integer=0, verbose::Bool=true)
```

This reads all blocks defined in `blocks` for the `halo` into a dictionary. `snap_base` and `sub_base` should point to the snap and subfind directories, or the files if you only have one file. The `HaloID` point to the selected halo. `halo_type` should be set to `1` for halos and `2` for subhalos. 
If you didn't get all the particles you were looking for it might be that the search radius for the read-in was too small. `rad_scale` defines the multiplication factor for the search radius. For halos the default search radius is ``r_{200}`` and for subhalos it's the half-mass radius.

Commit message:

updated docs for large simulations

docs/src/read_data.md, after:

# Read Snapshot Data


```@meta
CurrentModule = GadgetIO
DocTestSetup = quote
    using GadgetIO
end
```

## Reading the header


Reading the header block of the simulation can be done by using:

```julia
 h = read_header(filename::String)
```

Where `h` is the returned [`Header`](@ref) object:

```julia
mutable struct Header
    npart::Vector{Int32}                # an array of particle numbers per type in this snapshot
    massarr::Vector{Float64}            # an array of particle masses per type in this snapshot - if zero: MASS block present
    time::Float64                       # time / scale factor of the simulation
    z::Float64                          # redshift of the simulation
    flag_sfr::Int32                     # 1 if simulation was run with star formation, else 0
    flag_feedback::Int32                # 1 if simulation was run with stellar feedback, else 0
    nall::Vector{UInt32}                # total number of particles in the simulation
    flag_cooling::Int32                 # 1 if simulation was run with cooling, else 0
    num_files::Int32                    # number of snapshots over which the simulation is distributed
    boxsize::Float64                    # total size of the simulation box
    omega_0::Float64                    # Omega matter
    omega_l::Float64                    # Omega dark enery
    h0::Float64                         # little h
    flag_stellarage::Int32              # 1 if simulation was run with stellar age, else 0
    flag_metals::Int32                  # 1 if simulation was run with metals, else 0
    npartTotalHighWord::Vector{UInt32}  # weird
    flag_entropy_instead_u::Int32       # 1 if snapshot U field contains entropy instead of internal energy, else 0
    flag_doubleprecision::Int32         # 1 if snapshot is in double precision, else 0
    flag_ic_info::Int32                 # 1 if the IC file contains an INFO block   
    lpt_scalingfactor::Float32          # (almost) never used
    fill::Vector{Int32}                 # the HEAD block needs to be filled with zeros to have a size of 256 bytes
end
```

This is equivalent to:

```julia
 h = head_to_obj(filename::String)
```

If you want to read the header information into a dictionary you can use:

```julia
 h = head_to_dict(filename::String)
```

## Reading a snapshot


### Full snapshot
If you want to read a simulation snapshot into memory with GadgetIO.jl, it's as easy as this:

```julia
    data = read_snap(filename)
```

This will return a dictionary with the header information in `data["Header"]` and the blocks sorted by particle type.

As an example, this is how you would access the positions of the gas particles:

```julia
    data["Parttype0"]["POS"]
```


### Specific blocks

Reading specific blocks only works with Format 2 at the moment.

If you only want to read a specific block for a single particle type, e.g. positions of gas particles, you can use the function with a specified blockname and particle type like so:

```julia
    pos = read_snap(filename, "POS", 0)
```

This will return an array of the datatype of your simulation, usually `Float32`.

If the snapshot has no info block this will fail unfortunately.

You can still read the specific block by supplying a hand-constructed [`Info_Line`](@ref) object:

```julia
mutable struct Info_Line
    block_name::String              # name of the data block, e.g. "POS"
    data_type::DataType             # datatype of the block, e.g. Float32 for single precision, Float64 for double
    n_dim::Int32                    # number of dimensions of the block, usually 1 or 3
    is_present::Vector{Int32}       # array of flags for which particle type this block is present,
                                    # e.g. gas only:  [ 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0 ]
                                    # e.g. gas + BHs: [ 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1 ]
end
```

and passing that to the function [`read_block_by_name`](@ref):

```julia
    pos = read_block_by_name(filename, "POS", info=pos_info, parttype=0)
```

where `pos_info` is an [`Info_Line`](@ref) object.

[`read_snap`](@ref) is used mainly as a wrapper function to call [`read_block_by_name`](@ref), in case you were wondering about the function name change.

I will collect some example `Info_Line` objects in a later release to be able to read some common blocks even without an info block.

### Getting snapshot infos

If you have a Format 2 snapshot and just want to know what blocks the snapshot contains you can use the function

```julia
    print_blocks(filename)
```

to get an output of all block names.

If your simulation contains an INFO block you can read the info lines into [`Info_Line`](@ref) object like so:

```julia
    info = read_info(filename, verbose=true)
```

This will return an Array of [`Info_Line`](@ref) objects. The optional keyword `verbose` additionally gives the same functionality as [`print_blocks`](@ref) and prints the names to the console.


### Reading particles by referenced ID

If you want to select specific particles to read from an array if `IDs` you can do this with [`read_particles_by_id`](@ref):

```julia
read_particles_by_id(snap_base::String, selected_ids::Array{<:Integer}, 
                     blocks::Array{String}; 
                     parttype::Integer=0, verbose::Bool=true,
                     pos0::Array{<:Real}=[-1.234, -1.234, -1.234],
                     r0::Real=0.0, use_keys::Bool=true)
```

`snap_base` defines the target snapshot, or the snapshot directory, `selected_ids` contains the list of IDs of the particles you want to read and `blocks` containes the blocksnames of the blocks you want to read.
If the simulation is too large to read the whole snapshot into memory you can give values for `pos0` and `r0` to read only a specific region with [`read_particles_in_volume`](@ref). See [Read Subvolumes](@ref) for details on this.

This will return a dictionary with all requested blocks.

## Read Subvolumes

If you only want to read a subvolume of the whole simulation you can do this in two ways.
To get all particles within a subvolume of the simulation you can use the functions [`read_particles_in_box`](@ref) or [`read_particles_in_volume`](@ref).

[`read_particles_in_box`](@ref) takes a box defined by a lower-left corner and an upper-right corner and reads all requested blocks and particles in that volume.

```julia
function read_particles_in_box( filename::String, blocks::Vector{String},
                                corner_lowerleft,
                                corner_upperright;
                                parttype::Int=0,
                                verbose::Bool=true,
                                use_keys::Bool=true )

            (...)

end
```

You can define an array of blocks you want to read, these will be read in parallel with simple multi-threading.

[`read_particles_in_volume`](@ref) is a simple wrapper around [`read_particles_in_box`](@ref), where you can define a central position and a radius around it and it will construct the box containing that sphere for you and read all particles in it.

```julia
function read_particles_in_volume( filename::String, blocks::Vector{String},
                                   center_pos::Vector{AbstractFloat},
                                   radius::AbstractFloat;
                                   parttype::Int=0,
                                   verbose::Bool=true,
                                   use_keys::Bool=true )

            (...)
end
```

In both functions `parttype` defines the particle type to be read, as in the previous read functions and `verbose` gives console output.

### Peano-Hilbert key based reading

For large simulations Gadget distributes snapshots over multiple files. These files contain particles associated with specific Peano-Hilbert keys.

If you call [`read_particles_in_box`](@ref) or [`read_particles_in_volume`](@ref) with the keyword argument `use_keys=true` (which is the default case) it constructs the peano hilbert keys, selects the relevant files and reads the particles from these files into a dictionary. This is considerably faster than the brute-force attempt.


### Brute-Force Reading
If you call [`read_particles_in_box`](@ref) or [`read_particles_in_volume`](@ref) with the keyword argument `use_keys=false` it reads all particles over all distributed files which are contained in the requested subvolume.
This takes quite a lot longer than the key based reading, but sometimes it's the only option.

### Filename

With the snapshots being distributed over multiple filenames you need to be careful with that keyword. In this case filename refers to the base-name. Assuming you want to read snapshot 140, which is in the snapshot directory 140 the filename is

```julia
filename = "path/to/your/snapshot/directories/snapdir_140/snap_140"
```

GadgetIO will then automatically loop through the sub-snapshots which end in ".0", ".1", ... , ".N".

### Example

If you want to, e.g. read positions, velocities, masses, density and hsml for all gas particles within the virial radius of the most massive halo of a simulation you can do this as follows.

Assuming `pos_halo` is the position of the center of mass of the halo and `r_vir` is its virial radius you read the data with

```julia
blocks = ["POS", "VEL", "MASS", "RHO", "HSML"]

data   = read_particles_in_volume(filename, blocks, pos_halo, r_vir,
                                  parttype=0,
                                  verbose=true)
```

This will return a dictionary with the blocks as keys and containing the arrays for the particles.

```julia
data["POS"]  # array of positions
data["RHO"]  # array of densities
(...)
```

## Read distributed snapshotfiles

If you want to read in a simulation whose snapshots have been distributed over a number of sub-snapshots you can use [`read_blocks_over_all_files`](@ref).

```julia
read_blocks_over_all_files(snap_base::String, blocks::Array{String}, filter_function::Function; 
                                    N_to_read::Integer=-1, parttype::Integer=0)
```
This will read the specified `blocks` for all particles that pass the `filter_function`. This can be useful if you don't know where the region you are interested in is located and don't have enough memory to read in all particles.

### Filter functions

The `filter_function` can be any function that takes a `String` input and returns an `Array` of `Integer`s, or `CartesianCoordinates`.
For example, if you want to filter all particles with a Mach number larger than 1:

```julia
function mach_gt_1(snap_file)
    mach = read_snap(snap_file, "MACH", 0)
    sel  = findall( mach .> 1.0 )
    return sel
end
```

Or if you want to trick the function into reading all particles after all:

```julia
function pass_all(snap_file)
    h = read_header(snap_file)
    return collect(1:h.npart[1])
end
```

# Read Subfind Data


## Reading the header


Similarly to the normal snapshot you can read the header of the subfind output into a [`SubfindHeader`](@ref) object

```julia
struct SubfindHeader
    nhalos::Int32                       # number of halos in the output file
    nsubhalos::Int32                    # number of subhalos in the output file
    nfof::Int32                         # number of particles in the FoF
    ngroups::Int32                      # number of large groups in the output file
    time::Float64                       # time / scale factor of the simulation
    z::Float64                          # redshift of the simulation
    tothalos::UInt32                    # total number of halos over all output files
    totsubhalos::UInt32                 # total number of subhalos over all output files
    totfof::UInt32                      # total number of particles in the FoF
    totgroups::UInt32                   # total number of large groups over all output files
    num_colors::Int32                   # number of colors
    boxsize::Float64                    # total size of the simulation box
    omega_0::Float64                    # Omega matter
    omega_l::Float64                    # Omega dark enery
    h0::Float64                         # little h
    flag_doubleprecision::Int32         # 1 if snapshot is in double precision, else 0
    flag_ic_info::Int32
end
```

using

```julia
h = read_subfind_header(filename::String)
```

## Reading the subfind files


If you compiled Gadget with `WRITE_SUB_IN_SNAP_FORMAT` you can read the subfind output like you would a normal snapshot, with any of the above methods. For convenience you can also use a helper function provided by GadgetIO. Since each of the blocks is only relevant for either halos, subhalos, Fof or large groups you don't need to define a particly type, aka halo type in this case.

So in order to read the virial radius of the halos in a file you can simply use

```julia
R_vir = read_subfind(filename, "RVIR")
```

## Filtered read-in

If you want to read specific halos from the subfind output you can use the function

```julia
filter_subfind(filebase::String, blockname::String, filter_function::Function, nfiles::Integer=1)
```

This will return an array of [HaloID](@ref)s 

```julia
struct HaloID
    file::Int64
    id::Int64
end
```

You can use this to read specific files with [`read_subfind`](@ref) and select the array entry via the `id` field.

The `filter_function` argument takes any function that takes one input argument and returns `true` if the requirement is fulfilled, or `false` if not.

So to find e.g. all halos with a virial mass largert than ``10^{15} M_\odot`` you can use

```julia
find_mass_gt_1e15(M) = ( (M > 1.e15) ? true : false )

filtered_subfind = filter_subfind(filebase, "MVIR", find_mass_gt_1e15)
```

This will search all subfind files in the directory and check if they fulfill the filter. Since halos in subfind files are sorted by mass you can also supply a number of files to search with the argument `nfiles`. That way, if you are looking for a very massive halo you can constrian the reading and filtering to only the first `N` files to save time.


## Reading particles in a halo


If you want to read all particles associated with a FoF halo you can do this with the function [`read_particles_in_halo`](@ref)

```julia
read_particles_in_halo( snap_base::String, blocks::Array{String},
                        sub_base::String, halo::HaloID; 
                        rad_scale::Real=1.0, halo_type::Integer=1,
                        parttype::Integer=0, verbose::Bool=true)
```

This reads all blocks defined in `blocks` for the `halo` into a dictionary. `snap_base` and `sub_base` should point to the snap and subfind directories, or the files if you only have one file. The `HaloID` point to the selected halo. `halo_type` should be set to `1` for halos and `2` for subhalos. 
If you didn't get all the particles you were looking for it might be that the search radius for the read-in was too small. `rad_scale` defines the multiplication factor for the search radius. For halos the default search radius is ``r_{200}`` and for subhalos it's the half-mass radius.
